I asked my audience for their 15 most
popular unanswered questions about how
to lose fat or to gain muscle mass. The
first one, how do I lose weight fast?
But you just answered that.
>> Yeah.
>> The second one is creatine this miracle
thing that everybody should be taking.
>> There's almost nothing creatine can't
do.
>> Wow, some statement.
>> Next, is there any harm in eating too
much protein?
>> It's rare and in fact, almost everybody
who has some degree of an issue with
their body fat levels under consume
protein.
>> My next question is about PCOS. What
would you say to a woman struggling with
PCOS in terms of dietary prescription?
>> That's a damn good question, man. Can I
go into detail with this because a lot
of people are very misinformed about
this stuff.
>> The floor is yours.
>> Okay, so Alan Araggon has been using
science to help elite athletes unlock
peak performance for over 30 years.
>> And now he's breaking down the nutrition
and training strategies that actually
deliver results. It's important to take
an evidence-based approach to diet,
nutrition, training, supplementation,
because if you don't, then you end up
wasting a lot of time.
>> So, let's start with protein. So, how
much protein should I be eating to gain
muscle?
>> What is your goal body weight? It's
>> around 90.
>> Take 90 and multiply that by there's
your protein target.
>> What about calorie restriction? I've
heard you say that 10 or 20% of your
calories can come from pretty much
anything you want.
>> Literally anything.
>> So, I could eat McDonald's or something
and I could still lose weight
theoretically.
>> That's true. And this is reflected in
research along with diet breaks. That's
one of the tactics that you can use for
long-term adherence to a plan. And I'll
explain how.
>> I also want to talk about the ketogenic
diet, menopause, fasting, sugars, and
this
>> that that always gets me, man. That that
picture always gets me.
>> Why?
>> I used to drink heavily. I was
overworked and trying to be the best
father and the best husband.
And it got real bad.
I just needed to stop and I did. How?
>> I just
>> Wow. Really?
>> Yes.
>> I see messages all the time in the
comments section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because a strange way
you are you're part of our history and
you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So yeah, thank
you
Alan.
Why should I listen to you? What have
you done in your career over the last 30
years that has given you the knowledge,
the information, the wisdom that you
have on nutrition, dieting, fitness,
etc.
Who is Allan?
>> I have over 30 years of experience in
the field. The first 10 years consisted
of personal training. The second decade
of my career was nutritional counseling.
Just counseling people on on how to eat,
what to eat. And then the third decade
of my career, which actually running on
13 years now, is the research and
education side. My colleagues and I, we
in quotes do the science. We published
the science. I've been a part of 30 30
publications,
>> 30 studies.
>> Yeah. Yeah. A combination of narrative
reviews, systematic reviews, and
metaanalyses and randomized control
trials.
>> And how many people have you worked with
directly over the last 30 years in terms
of in your your nutritional counseling
role, but also as a as a trainer?
Individually, it's
it's triple digits. Groups
potentially quadruple. Yeah.
>> And some of those people that you've
worked with over the years are fairly
high-profile.
>> Yeah. Individuals.
>> Yeah. Probably my
most interesting story is getting an
email from Steve Austin and and the
wrestling fans know him as Stone Cold
Steve Austin. In so many words, he said,
"Hey, Allan, I've been
I've been doing my research and
you're you're the guy, so I want to work
with you. Um, I know that you mentioned
that you're not working with clients,
but could you please make an exception
for me? Here's my number."
>> What did you do with him with Stone? I
helped him get his nutrition right for
his
uh in quotes uh come back to television.
It was mainly focused on primarily fat
loss.
>> And you worked with Derek Fischer as
well, who's the five-time NBA champion.
>> Yes.
>> The longtime LA Lakers player.
>> Yeah.
>> And Pete Sampas, the former world number
one tennis player and grand slam
champion.
>> Yeah. Pete Sandra. That's right.
When people come to you and when they
message you and DM you, there's probably
similar themes. Similar themes as to
like what they're trying to accomplish
and what their goal is. If you just from
the top of your head had to state the
most popular themes that people are
trying to accomplish.
What are they?
>> How to improve body composition.
>> What does that mean?
>> How to lose fat and or gain muscle.
One of the things that I'm I'm
particularly intrigued by which kind of
dubtales into both of those subjects of
fat and muscle gain is the subject of
protein and um because there's been so
much said about protein. You know, when
I was growing up, they said you have to
have protein right after you eat your
meal. You have to have this much
protein. You have to have it before you
eat your meal. It doesn't matter when
you have it. So, I want to do a bit of
myth busting on the subject of protein.
What are what are the biggest myths that
people currently believe about protein
consumption?
>> The biggest myth is that they have the
hierarchy of importance all screwed up.
Like everybody's worried about how much
protein per meal you need to have for
this or that goal. When do you need to
time protein relative to the training
bout or waking or sleeping or all that
stuff. The main thing they need to be
focused on is how much protein do they
need to eat by the end of the day?
Because when you hit that goal, you've
basically won the whole game. The the
relative placement, the distribution,
and the doses of the protein, the timing
of it, oh man, it rarely matters. It
rarely matters beyond
getting that protein in in a way that's
comfortable and convenient for you. and
in such a way that you can stick to in
the long term. Some people are more like
grazers, some people are more like
gorgers.
They're both fine as long as you hit the
total by the end of the day. So the
hierarchy is of utmost importance. Get
your total daily protein.
>> And then of secondary importance would
be what is the distribution of the
constituent doses of that protein total
through the day. And then a third
importance down here is like when
specifically are you supposed to time
that protein around the the the training
bout. So So yeah, the what the way that
I put it is like this. The daily total
for protein that is the cake. The
distribution
of the doses through the day that's the
icing on the cake. And it's a very thin
layer of icing.
>> And how do we know that? How do we know
that it doesn't really matter what time
you have the protein and that the most
important thing is just making sure you
get the protein?
>> That's a great question. The reason that
we know that distribution doesn't matter
as much as the total is through a couple
lines of evidence that I can think of.
So there's Yasuda who who compared a
three meal model with a two meal model.
And the three meal model had superior
effects for uh for muscle gain.
But there is a study that was just
published gosh within the last month. It
was better from a methodology standpoint
because they fed the subjects an
abundance of protein. So Yasuda and
college who and colleagues who tested
the two versus three, he totaled
everybody out at 1.3 g per kilogram of
body weight per day. That's the total
daily protein dose. And so we know now
that that's a suboptimal total if you
want to push muscle growth. So for
pushing muscle growth, we know you you
should be at 1.6 g per kilogram of body
weight, which translates to 7 g per
pound of body weight. That's where you
really want to be if you want to
maximize
muscular adaptations to resistance
training like muscle size and strength
gains. So this latest study, they
compared three
uh three protein feedings versus five
protein feedings. And the totals of
protein intake in the day in both groups
were around a gram per pound. So right
around 2.2ish grams per kilogram of body
weight. So we have the optimized daily
total and we're testing three versus
five protein feedings. were doing
progressive resistance training and this
is the key. This happened in resistance
trained subjects. There were no
significant differences as m in muscle
size and strength gain between the three
protein feedings a day versus five
protein feedings a day. And this is the
best designed study to date on the on
the topic. And and so
>> because when I grew up and read stuff
about gaining muscle, it said you have
to have like five or six meals a day.
Mhm. Um I said that's what bodybuilders
do.
>> Whenever we we talk about any kind of
physical goal, any any sort of fitness
goal, we have to address
two main things. So who's the who's the
population
and what goal are we talking about? And
maybe a third thing we need to address
is what is at stake? So what level are
we talking about? So population goal,
what level? What's at stake? So with
bodybuilders
at elite levels
it is
most of them consume
five six meals a day. Some of them do
like even seven or eight in the
offseason.
And these are individuals who are
enhanced and so their ceiling for muscle
growth and their rates of muscle muscle
growth are significantly higher than
people who are in quotes natural.
And the amount of food that these
individuals can process and use
productively is significantly more. And
so with that population, I can see it
being pretty standard for them to be
consuming at least five, six meals a day
since they tend to have since they tend
to be eating double the amount of of the
average person.
>> And so, but the interesting thing that
happens is that the guidelines from this
very sort of fringe elite population,
that's what trickles down into the
general public. and then they're stuck
thinking, okay, maybe I need to eat
every 2.5 hours or or some such.
>> But yeah, with the with the general
population and even um recreational
athletes and people who are hobbyists
and and stuff, you really
the impact of actual protein
distribution is
inconsequential compared to the total.
>> So, how much protein should I be eating
a day? because I think you disagree with
the recommended daily sort of allowance
that they suggest we eat as um I think
I'm 90 kg.
>> Mhm.
>> How much protein should I be eating to
gain muscle, lean muscle mass?
>> Okay. So, we're going to apply you to
the population and the goal and the
stakes questions. So, what would you say
your training status is? You're
obviously not a beginner.
Um, so you're somewhere between
intermediate and advanced.
>> Mhm.
>> Right.
>> Yeah.
>> So, what is your goal?
>> Just to lose fat and gain muscle.
>> Okay.
>> Familiar story, I'm sure.
>> Okay. The way that I do it is I go 1.6
to 2.2 g per kilogram of target body
weight or goal body weight.
>> Mhm.
>> So, that's the range that you would be
looking at. Now, with you in particular,
I would go more towards the upper end
because you mentioned that you part of
your goal is to decrease body fat to a
to a minor degree,
>> but you're still you're pushing the
envelope because you're already lean.
>> Mhm.
>> So, there's an interesting thing about
high balling protein that facilitates
that uh reduction in body fat.
If I have a lot of protein, it helps to
reduce body fat.
>> Yeah. Yeah, it does. And the way that we
know this is because there have been
several studies now, four trials, one
case study um by Joey Antonio and
colleagues, and they
examine the effect of very high protein
intakes anywhere from about 3.3 all the
way to 4.4 four gram per kilogram of
body weight roughly. Gosh, you know, a
gram and a half to two grams per pound.
>> Is that because you're eating less
carbohydrates? You're sort of
substituting it for something else
essentially in terms of you feeling
hungry. So, if I'm having 3.3 g of
protein, I'm probably not going to be
having something else which is more
fatty.
>> Yeah, that's right. That's right. So
this particular line of research was
done on people who were resistance
training and it was done in free living
conditions and they just gave them the
assignment to essentially
increase their their protein intake by
50%.
and
literally add
80 to 100 grams of protein on top of
their existing habitual dietary intakes.
>> So, what would you say to me then? You'd
say push even higher
in terms of grams per kilogram of body
weight.
>> What is your goal body weight?
>> I don't actually have a goal body weight
to be honest. I just have more of a a
goal in terms of like strength.
>> How about this? Were you ever in the
shape that you are wanting to be in? And
what what was your body weight at that
time?
>> I was around 90. I think I was just a
little bit below 90 kg. So I think I was
about 88.
>> Okay. So you know what? Let's let's take
90.
>> Yeah.
>> And multiply that by 2.2.
>> 90 time 2.2.
>> There's your protein target.
>> 198
>> grams of protein a day. So, if my if a
protein shake gives me 20 grams of
protein, I I need to have basically 10 g
10 protein shakes a day. That's seems
like a lot of protein.
>> That is a lot of protein. Uh I I would
give a little caveat here. You can
probably achieve your your goal
>> with
1.6
grams per kilogram of body weight. So,
that would be the lower end. So,
multiply 90 by 1.6. six.
>> Mhm.
>> And that's where you can start. So if if
that 198 number seems kind of
far-fetched or even a little bit like,
hm, how how would I even achieve that?
Then start off at the lower end.
>> Do women have a different prescription
in this regard? Is there a different
approach if you're a woman?
>> Yeah. If you're a woman, you would
almost always start at the low end
because women have a higher proportion
of body fat and and by default, they
have a lower proportion of lean mass. So
with women it would almost always be all
right let's start at 1.6 grams per
kilogram of target body weight and see
how you do with that and we can always
ratchet it up if needed.
>> Is there any such harm in eating too
much protein?
>> It's rare. Uh you would have to have a
pre-existing chronic kidney disease and
then it's generally not a good thing to
be highballing the protein. Um, but even
people with chronic kidney disease have
to realize the trade-off that they're
incurring with a low protein diet and
older age sarcopenia and stuff. How are
they going to mitigate that? But for the
general healthy population,
there have been many studies that have
rolled out looking at effects on kidney
function, liver function, bone health,
and there is virtually zero threat to
those organ systems that that you would
think might be threatened by a high
protein intake. So the human organism
perfectly well equipped to metabolize
and handle high protein amounts. And not
all protein is equal, I guess, because
you've got you've got these animal
proteins and then plant proteins um that
come from things like eggs and so on.
What is the best type of protein, do you
think? Is there such a thing?
I think that the best thing you can do
is get a mix of different types of
protein. It is true that gram for gram
generally speaking animal proteins are
more in quotes anabolic than plant
proteins meaning that they stimulate a
greater
growth response
>> of muscle
>> at the muscle level. So they stimulate
muscle protein synthesis more potently
than plant proteins.
And
there are there's maybe one exception to
that that we know of which is mop
protein which is a fungusbased protein
that actually outperformed milk protein
for stimulating muscle protein
synthesis. So there's interesting
exceptions like that but generally
speaking animal proteins are better for
muscle protein synthesis than plant
proteins. Now, with that said, Stephen,
once you consume a certain amount of
total daily protein, then it doesn't
appear to matter how much of your
protein is animal-based versus how much
your pro your protein is plant-based. If
we're looking at things like muscle size
and strength gain because this has been
actually compared in controlled
interventions where um vegan group has
been compared with an omnivore group and
total daily protein was optimized at 1.6
g per kilogram of body weight per day
or.7 g per pound in both groups.
Progressive resistance training for 12
weeks. no significant differences
between groups in muscle size and
strength gain whether it was a
omnivorous protein intake or whether it
was a plant-based protein intake and we
have two studies showing that now
>> you must have so many moments where
you're working with someone through your
career who's got a goal and he feels
like they just can't accomplish it where
you find yourself saying the same thing
over and over again to people about how
to lose fat or to gain muscle mass is
that same thing just to have more
protein.
>> It's a common thing with the general
population, with the lay public. Like my
my protein target is at least 160 grams
a day. So,
I just make sure that I have four meals
with at least 40 g of protein per day.
And it's so easy to do. It's incredibly
easy to do because two of my meals per
day are just real whole foods. And then
two of my meals per day, two to three,
are protein smoothies. And so, uh, it is
just so incredibly easy for me to to get
my protein intake through. Like two
scoops of protein, bam, that's almost 50
grams of protein right there. Right
there. So, you have two of those a day,
I've got more than half my protein
covered.
>> But if I if I have all of my protein in
one meal,
>> Mhm.
>> is that going to impact my ability to
gain muscle or lose fat if I have it all
in one meal? If I just have like one
massive protein shake, if I put like
five scoops. Now, if you were telling
me, "Hey, Allan, I want to place really
good in the Nationals this year, the NPC
Nationals, classic classic physique or,
you know, classic bodybuilding or just
any one of the physique divisions,
I would say, you know, you you are not
going to want to try to get all your
protein in a single meal because what we
want to do is we want to maximize the
number of microanabolic
events in the course of the day. We want
to maximize the amount of times you
maximally stimulate muscle protein
synthesis in the course of the day. And
just from a a pragmatic standpoint, you
could probably do that at least three or
four times. And if you're able to do
that three or four times in a day versus
once with that one big banger of a meal,
then you might actually over time gain
more muscle than you would have. And
this could make the difference between
placings at the end of the uh end of the
prep period. So, but as somebody in the
general population,
theoretically you could
>> I am going to challenge you to do
something here. I asked my audience
about weight loss and asked them for
their 15 most popular questions that are
currently unanswered for them.
>> All right.
>> About weight loss.
>> The first one was, "How do I lose weight
fast?"
>> So essentially, you can engage
what would could be classified as a as a
as a protein sparing modified fast.
You're basically crash dieting. Um,
I don't love doing that though,
honestly.
>> Listen, I've got a wedding. I need to I
need to lose weight fast. How do I lose
weight fast?
>> Losing weight fast. So, you would
basically do an aggressive caloric
deficit. So, anywhere I I would say
20% below your maintenance needs. 20 to
possibly 40 depending on the individual
percent below your maintenance needs.
And then keep the protein high. And this
is going to default you to relatively
low carbohydrate, relatively low fat,
and just train regularly. Don't hurt
yourself. Um,
>> protein high, you said.
>> Yeah, protein high. And calories wise,
so for example,
if you maintained at we we'll just take
a round number, 2,000 calories. So you
would just lop off about a third of that
and then just go and see if you can
maintain your fat loss while maintaining
strength levels relatively. You're it's
almost inevitable to crash diet and uh
lose some strength in the process. But I
mean we're we're talking about something
that's not an optimal process. But yeah,
that that's that's the game basically.
Aggressive caloric deficit, keep protein
very high and then you just go and the
deficit could be anywhere from 500 to
a,000ish calories below what you
normally take in.
>> The second one is why do I regain weight
after stopping a Zmpeek, WGO, etc.
All right. So those GLP-1
RAS, the recep GLP-1 receptor agonist
drugs like WGOI,
they have um at least three different
mechanisms that all converge towards
almost nullifying your your hunger and
your appetite response. And so when you
cut out the drug, then your normal
appetite comes back.
And
an unfortunate reality for a lot of uh
GLP1 users when they get off the drug is
they just don't have the habits and they
don't have the skills necessarily to
maintain their weight loss. And of
course, once again, they're fighting
their appetite. So I would say
perhaps try um a weaning off process
instead of just a jumping off process. A
weaning off process where you are
reinforcing
countermeasures to overeating, where you
are reinforcing
good training habits and good dietary
habits. And we're al where you're also
progressively learning how to live with
and deal with sensations of hunger
between meals. and just train those
habits in. And uh it can be done. I I I
I'm not one of the people in the camp
who says it's impossible to get off of a
weight loss drug successfully.
>> So number three again is is my
metabolism damaged after dieting? And
they're asking a question here about
something called adaptive thermogenesis.
>> Yeah. Okay. So this is not really a
short shot here. So the the process of
metabolic adaptation is kind of complex
and it happens in both directions
whether you try to gain weight or
whether you try to lose weight. So
earlier we talked about uh an increase
in non exercise activity thermogenesis
or NEAt an increase in NEAt in response
to an increase in calories. So that
occurs and across studies. I I gave an
example that showed a 336
calorie increase in NEAt when a thousand
calories were stacked on top of people's
maintenance. But there are other studies
where the caloric increase was not quite
that aggressive. And so so on average
increases in
NEAT or non-ex exercise activity
thermogenesis are about 2 to 300
calories. So you increase your energy
expenditure about two to 300 calories if
you're overeating.
>> Yeah. So your body will start to twitch
more and move more burning more
non-active calories. That's correct.
>> When you're overeating. Yeah. So that's
an that's an adaptation.
>> That that's the adaptation in the
caloric surplus side. So in the caloric
deficit side,
it's just the opposite thing, just the
mirror of it. So people decrease their
non-ex exercise activity thermogenesis
or their need. They decrease it on
average like two to threeish hundred
calories.
>> Okay.
>> As a result of dieting. So this is part
of a metabolic adaptation that occurs
with dieting.
>> Is this why people don't think the
calories in calories out system is
working for them sometimes? because they
don't realize that if they're in a
calorie deficit, sometimes they are
subconsciously moving around less, which
means that they're burning less
calories. Um, so actually they're not in
a calorie deficit.
>> Yes, that's correct. So with the dieting
side of things, which is much more of a
public health issue, weight loss is is
much more of a a necessity than the
weight gain.
It's it's tougher for most people
because in addition to the decrease in
non-ex exercise activity that'll cost
people two to 300ish calories that
they're no longer uh no longer burning
at the end of the dieting cycle. Then
you've got
what's called adaptive thermo reduction.
Okay. So you mentioned adaptive
thermogenesis.
Technically that is the there's
non-shivering adaptive thermogenesis and
there's shivering adaptive
thermogenesis. But that all has to do
with increases in energy expenditure in
response to cold environments. So that's
technically that's what adaptive
thermogenesis is. It's an increase in
energy expenditure. When people diet,
there's something called adaptive thermo
reduction.
And that is that part of it is a
decrease in non-ex exercise activity
thermogenesis.
>> You're you're basically saying that the
body changes when we're in a calorie
deficit.
>> It stops doing as much.
>> Yes. That's the activity part.
>> Yeah.
>> But then there's also the metabolic
part. So we've got a decrease in non-ex
exercise activity.
>> Yeah.
>> Then we have adaptive thermo reduction
which has to do with a a metabolic
component that has to do with the
sympathetic nervous system and also
potentially thyroid output as well. So
there's this metabolic change that goes
on and there's behavioral or activity
change that goes on. So when people say
I've got a slow metabolism,
>> they might be telling the truth.
>> When people say I have a slow
metabolism, what's usually happening is
they have a pretty massive drop in NEAT
or non-ex exercise activity to the order
of 2 to 300 calories. Now adaptive
thermo reduction is another 50 to 100
calories.
>> Okay? So, we're looking at in the
neighborhood of like possibly three 400
calories that they're no longer burning
as a result of the dieting process. Now,
if you take somebody with um clinically
diagnosed hypothyroidism,
then their resting metabolic rate could
be 7 to 10% lower than somebody without
a thyroid issue. So you add another one
to 200 calories less burned over here.
Then you have the potential for five to
600 calories of energy expenditure that
this person is challenged with uh at the
end of their dieting cycle. So they're
>> so I guess it is kind of true in a in a
way that people understand it that if
you overeat your metabolism as far as
they understand what their metabolism is
is increasing and if you undereat then
your metabolism is slowing down.
>> Yes. But I have to emphasize the major
component that slows down is your non
exercise activity.
>> You're not moving around as much.
>> Yes. the other components like adaptive
thermal reduction and potential thyroid
issues. That is the minor component. The
major component is a drop in fidgeting,
a slowing of the rate that you walk
around, an increase in the amount you
sit around,
>> and you can control that.
>> Yes, it's it's hard to put a put a
finger on it, but as long as you know
that stuff goes down, I give you an
example of uh physique competitors.
They are
as their cutting cutting phase
progresses, they're literally lying
around in between their cardio sessions
and their resistance training sessions
and their Tupperware meal sessions.
>> Okay? They're no longer tapping their
heads bo, you know, tapping their
fingers and bobbing their heads and
they're no longer have a pep in their
step. They're no longer doing non
exercise activities, basically. Question
four, what diet actually works best for
long-term weight loss? Keto, low-fat,
Mediterranean, intermittent fasting. And
you got to give me a answer.
I'll say it in one sentence.
The diet with enough protein, enough
total calories
that is comprised predominantly of
healthy food choices
that fits the individual's personal
preferences and tolerances.
>> How do I lose belly fat specifically?
Can you target the belly?
Targeting belly fat specifically is a
matter of targeting total body fat. You
can't
necessarily
spot reduce the the belly fat. Now, if
we're go a layer deeper, it is possible
for certain diets to be more conducive
to preventing visceral fat gain or maybe
even accelerating visceral fat loss.
Visceral fat is the fat uh in the within
the abdominal cavity around the the
organs. And so it is possible for
certain diets to be more conducive to
reductions in visceral fat. And that
would be diets that have a lower
proportion of saturated fat,
>> which is what's what's an example of a
saturated fat food?
>> Land fatty land animal meats. So land
animal fats are going to be your
saturated fats that are more conducive
to visceral fat gain. So if you were to
switch out, let's say fatty cuts of
meat, just trim that fat out and if you
replaced it with something like avocado
nuts, olive oil, seeds
>> on menopause, why is fat loss harder and
what actually works?
>> Okay. During the menopausal transition,
which begins at a woman's mid-40s on
average and then ends in in the mid-50s,
there are changes physiologically and
hormonally
that can challenge a fitness program.
So, it can challenge their ability to
execute the fitness program and adhere
to it. And so things like hot flashes
and joint pain, changes in sexual
function
and poor sleep.
All of those things can converge to
lead to a a decreased ability to stick
to a program and do the necessary
physical activity and dietary adherence
to reach the sort of the standard rate
of progress for body composition change.
And so the solution to that would be
simply you don't have to rearrange a
whole program because somebody's going
through menopause. You don't have to cut
out nutrients and do any special things.
What has been effective is just lowering
the expectation of progress. So whereas
I would typically have somebody gun for
a pound a week of fat loss, somebody in
the menopausal transition, they have
more challenges to that going on
simultaneously. So we would go for about
half of that
>> protein.
What do what do they do in terms of
protein? Just keep the protein high.
>> Same range. Yeah. So, with protein, I
got to say there's sort of a two-tiered
recommendation. So, the general public
with average goals
>> Mhm.
>> will do just fine on 1.2 to 1.6 g per
kilogram of body weight. That's kind of
like the general population average
goal, folks. somebody like yourself, uh,
somebody like me and folks who are
oriented towards maybe pushing the
envelope a little bit more than the
average
1.6 to 2.2 g per kilogram of body
weight. And you know, there's a little
margin over here for people on the
fringe physique competitors who I would
have no problem seeing them go higher
than that 2.2 g per kilogram cut off. Is
there anything else that
Perry or menopause or women need to
understand about gaining muscle and
keeping fat off when they're going
through menopause? Is there anything
else that we've missed?
>> You know, I I would just emphasize the
understanding that midlife presents
maybe the highest point of uh
psychological stress in in people's
lives. So starting from the late 40s
going all the way into people's 50s and
60s it's it's like that you know the
concentrated period in the menopausal
transition mid-40s to mid-50s is when
people are dealing with ailing parents
the stress of ailing parents the stress
of kids going through high school or
college. The stress of hitting a high
point in their careers. The pressures
thereof. the time and the energy that is
necessary to allocate for all of those
things.
>> Mhm.
>> All of those things distract from, oh,
I've got a fitness program here. Oh, my
coach is making me do this and this and
this and now he's making me diet like
this.
That's the thing that I I would
emphasize. There's nothing special or
different that needs to be done. And in
fact, there's a lot of mythology that's
circulating the space right now where
coaches and gurus and even some
physicians are telling women that they
are just doomed to gain a bunch of belly
fat and lose a bunch of muscle during
menopause. It just happens. You're
doomed. Well, that's just not true. Uh
there is a study called the Swan study.
That's the longest and largest study of
its kind. And the average amount of fat
gain during the entire menopausal
transition was 1.6 kilograms which is 3
and a half pounds. And the average
amount of muscle loss total during the
menopausal transition was 0.2 kg. That's
about half half a pound of muscle loss.
Statistically significant? Yes.
Insurmountable? No. So, and are there
going to be outliers who experience
double the muscle loss and double the
fat gain of that? Yes.
But none of this is insurmountable.
>> What do you think about taking is it
HRT? Does that help?
>> Yeah. Well, well, it it helps those who
need it. So, HRT should be looked at on
an individual basis. One of the things
that really annoys the absolute crap out
of me is when I'm seeing the comment
sections on social media with people
telling everybody that, "Hey, you just
turned 40. time to go on HRT.
That is between you and your doctor.
People are trying to universalize major
changes like HRT.
Some people definitely benefit from it.
And just the same, there are a lot of
people who don't need it.
>> The people that benefit from it, do they
find it easier to gain muscle mass and
to not gain fat? Is that kind of like
what
>> that is a common
>> Okay. That is a common result. Yes. But
my thing with HRT is is this. So
there has to be a symptomologic reason
to get on it. So you have to be
incurring or experiencing
symptoms that are disrupting to your
quality of life.
>> Mhm. Regardless of what your blood labs
are, like for testosterone for example,
if you are out of range for testosterone
on the lower end, let's say, but you
have no symptoms and you feel fine, you
perform great in all aspects, then it's
really up to you whether it bugs you
enough that you're below range or lower
on the lower end of the range um to
correct that. It it's up to you. And so
symptomologically driven. Now the other
thing to look at with HRT is and a lot
of people they get a single testing
point and they judge their need to get
on hormonal replacement therapy based on
a single single test.
What people need to do is see whether
there is some sort of trend going on in
one direction or another or not. And if
that trend is going in a bad direction
over time, and you you can do this by
just multiple time points over over an
extended period, it's debatable, like 6
months, 12 months to see what's going
on. Try to correct things through
lifestyle and diet. And often they are
correctable. Um,
I've just I've come across many cases
where a guy will be underslept,
overworked, eating like crap, gets his
testosterone levels tested. Oh, you're
right at the bottom or you're even below
range. Oh, time for HRT. Well, hold on a
second. Let's get this guy some sleep.
Let's improve his lifestyle, improve
body composition, and then bang,
testosterone levels double. This is not
an uncommon thing. And so I'm very much
a proponent of
first, are there symptoms driving the
justification for HRT? And then
secondly, are we basing things on a
single time point or did we actually see
a trend over time?
>> My next question is about PCOS. Mhm.
>> A lot of women are struggling with PCOS
and that's causing them to have
irregular menstrual cycles and
um fertility issues.
What would you say to a woman who is
struggling with PCOS in terms of dietary
prescription?
>> Okay. So PCOS shares a lot of metabolic
characteristics with type 2 diabetes.
So um there is insulin resistance going
on there. There is impaired glycemic
control going on. And so we can pretty
much justify being cautious with total
amount of carbohydrate intake with um
PCOS.
With type 2 diabetes there's two tiers
of importance dietarily. So of first
importance with type two diabetes, you
have to structure the diet so that it
allows body fat loss. The success of
GLP-1 drugs has actually proven that at
the heart of type 2 diabetes is
overeating
uh an abundance of body fat. So the way
that type 2 diabetes happens is in
genetically predisposed individuals they
gain total body fat and then they gain
visceral fat an undue amount of visceral
fat and then this leads to insulin
resistance and impairment of glycemic
control.
So PCOS is is very similar in this
regard. uh there is no standard or
consensusbased PCOS diet protocol, but
because it shares so many similar
characteristics with type 2 diabetes,
then we can pretty much employ the same
principles of how we would intervene
with type two diabetes, which would
number one put a priority on total body
fat reduction. And then tier number two
would be all right, do we need to
restrict carbohydrates even further? And
so that would be very similar with with
PCOS. And at kind of a population level
with type two diabetes,
roughly 130ish grams of carbohydrates a
day seems to be sort of the sweet spot
uh below which people have an easier
time controlling their blood sugar than
above that total amount. But that's just
a statistical average. We still have to
look at things case by case.
>> My girlfriend, she um has PCOS and she
did the ketogenic diet with me. She's on
it at the moment. We've been doing it
for about eight weeks now. Mhm.
>> We we do it intermittently throughout
the years. Um and she said her menstrual
cycle has perfectly corrected itself. I
think at its maximum it was like 60 days
her menstrual cycle
>> and then because she's restricted her
carbohydrates as you were saying in in
in this way using keto it's it's like
she said it's perfect. It's like
perfectly predictable now.
>> That's awesome. I I I say that in part
because people I think people don't with
PCOS who have irregular menstrual cycles
don't often consider that
carbohydrates, sugar, glucose, whatever
could be the perpetrator.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well,
>> because it's framed as a disease like
you you were born with it. Maybe it's
heritable. Maybe there's an element of
truth to that. But um it's crazy that
that dietary intervention had such a
profound impact on her in particular.
>> It's glad to hear that you found
something that works. That's yeah that's
an you know that's anytime you present
>> with some sort of clinical condition I
would first tell you hey see see an
endocrinologist or see a doctor who
specializes in that particular issue
>> and in terms of menstrual cycles
generally if you do have an irregular
menstrual cycle is there anything you
should be thinking about
>> number one see a doctor number two
consider whether or not you are
overtraining and undereating
>> so what happens happens with female
physique competitors.
Menstrual disruption, menstrual
cessation a few months into prep,
sometimes even a few weeks in a prep,
depending on how aggressive the diet is.
And so the menstrual disruption is very
common in competitive athletes and in
recreational athletes who have to
maintain a certain level of leanness
while maintaining a high volume of
exercise output. Is that the body from
an evolutionary perspective saying,
"Listen, we we don't have the energy to
have a baby here, so we're just going to
shut this down."
>> That is right on. Yeah.
>> So, you kind of do you don't want to be
restricting your calorie consumption too
much if you have an irregular menstrual
cycle and you're trying to correct that.
>> Yeah. No. No. Um, the so-called female
athlete triad begins with overtraining,
undereating, potential eating disorder,
nurturing going on there. And then down
the line, the menstrual cycle gets
disrupted and stops. And then hormonal
changes happen that are negative. And
then that ultimately results in
osteopenia,
osteoporosis.
And so that chain of events is
unfortunately really common with women
who um don't pay attention to a healthy
menstrual cycle.
>> People use this term all the time,
muscle memory. Mhm. Uh I thought it was
nonsense, but I spoke to someone the
other day and they said to me,
"Actually, no, your your body does have
a muscle memory, which means that if I
fall off now uh and I stop going to the
gym, my body is going to be able to get
back to my current physique faster
because I was here once upon a time.
>> Is this is this true?"
>> That is true. There's some debate going
on amongst the community what what goes
on physiologically with like when you
train you create you create new myoule
so you increase your so-called
myionuclear domains and those stay
relatively permanent even during times
of dtraining
but there's still the so-called
proprioceptive or motor component to
training that sticks with people sort of
the skill aspect of it that sticks with
people to be able to execute the
movements and do the things to cause the
adaptations. So, not only do you have
that muscle memory from the myionuclear
domain standpoint, but you have the
motor learning, the neurological
component, and to a degree you you also
have the skeletal component to be able
to capacitate those that rebound in
loading and muscle gain, muscle regain
rather.
>> Is the gut microbiome playing a role in
my ability to lose weight?
Not a big one. Um, of course, if I
>> Why did you make that sound?
>> Well, there's some people in the space
who put the microbiome a as the master
regulator everything, but it's
definitely a part of the the axis of
organ systems that that manifest
whatever, you know, result we're looking
at. It's part of it. Yes.
But it's not the the it's not the main
puppeteer of everything. everything
works in concert to and and I'll just
give you an example there. So,
there are certain supplements that are
um
that are claimed to be able to in quotes
fix the gut microbiome and cause greater
weight loss. So, there have been many
studies looking at this sort of
phenomenon.
And while there is a statistically
significant effect in some cases, the
absolute amount that they can help for
things like body fat loss or body weight
loss is usually not practically
significant. It's it's too small to be
considered meaningful. And so I wouldn't
necessarily rely on changes in the gut
microbiome for impacting like global
changes in body fat.
Here I have 20 eggs. I heard that you
eat 20 eggs per week, which is about,
you know, four eggs a day potentially.
Why do you eat so many eggs?
>> Well, number one, I'm one of those
weirdos who actually loves eggs. I love
I love the taste of them. Um, they're a
great source of protein. Uh, decent
source of fat, most of the fat, and
there is oleic acid, by the way, which
is a monounsaturate that predominates
olive oil. It's a low saturated fat
thing. Of course, the knock on eggs is
their cholesterol content. Um, but
interestingly, uh, it's dietary
saturated fat that has the greater
magnitude of impact on blood lipids than
than dietary cholesterol. Interestingly
enough, I recognize that the major
health agencies would want you to stop
your egg consumption to like one a day,
possibly two a day if you're an elderly
person. But I
take the uh health agencies um or even
the consensus guidelines as a okay,
that's cool. That's good starting point.
Um I happen to like eggs. I'll eat more
than that. Check my blood. Check my
health. I'm doing just fine. So, I'm one
of those people who can do four eggs a
day just fine.
>> Is this part of your broader
testosterone protocol?
>> I I like the fact that uh eggs are
conducive to testosterone production.
>> So, you're 53 years old, right?
>> Yes.
>> Do you test your testosterone levels? I
have not tested my testosterone levels
in forever, but I'm not concerned with
it because once again, it would be a
symptom-driven thing for me to even
care. So, if I was experiencing the
symptoms of low testosterone, then that
would give me a reason to check it out
and see what's going on. And then I
would have to take a step back and look
and see what can I modify with
lifestyle. What what do I have available
to change
non-drug-wise? And you know what? If I
ever need to take exogenous
testosterone, if that day ever comes,
well, then so be it. I'm just not there.
>> What supplements do you take every day?
>> I take a multivitamin. I take two
multivitamins, actually. Uh the reason
why I take two multivitamins is because
really certain key uh nutrients in
there,
they they have to be in such small
amounts per single pill that it's really
just meaningless. And so I take two
multivitamins, one of them with iron,
one of them without iron. And I also
take fish oil, uh I take magnesium, and
I take vitamin D3. I take vitamin C. And
and by the way, I really should preface
this with this is the bro science side
of my personal habits because I'm taking
my vitamins more on uh placing your bets
basis rather than hey man this is just
the bottom line evidence-based. I think
everybody should do this. Okay. So I
want I want to make sure that's clear. I
also take magnesium and I also take
collagen and I also take creatine. If I
told you you could only take three of
those supplements, which three would you
pick?
>> That's a damn good question, man. Can I
have uh can can I'm going to count my
two multis as one.
>> So, your multivitamin would be would
that be the first one?
>> Yes.
>> Okay. So, multivitamin
>> and omega-3s, the fish oil, vitamin D3.
>> So, you've you've sacked off the
creatine.
[Laughter]
>> You're a genius.
That's those are those would be those
would be the top three. I would c Can I
add creatine in there? Could I squeeze
it in there?
>> No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No.
No. No. No.
>> Oh, bro.
>> I had to pick three. So, you picked the
multivitamin, omega-3, the vitamin D3.
>> Well, it might humble me to kick the
creatine out. So, okay, fine. I'll leave
those three.
>> You call creatine king creatine.
>> Yeah.
>> Why' you call it that?
It's the only non-farmacological
supplement that that
really really has a very strong and deep
and broad evidence base for um enhancing
the effects of of resistance training.
So strength gains and size gains more
strength than size. The size gains they
they come with the initial uh loading
phase where a lot more intramuscular
water
happens or you know intracellular
intramiocellular
hydration. That is the the big immediate
part of creatine that that folks feel
when they go on it and when they go off
of it. So you you'll lose a few pounds
of lean mass if you get off of creatine.
I call it kreat creatine because it has
possibly
close to a I want to say it's reached
over a thousand studies and the majority
of those studies show um positive
effects. Usually with with creatine if
you were to compare a group taking
creatine versus a group not taking
creatine. So the creatine group will
have like a 20% increase in their
lifting capacity whereas the
non-creatine group will have like 12ish%
increase in their lifting capacity over
a typical study length 8 to 12 weeksish.
And so that is a significant strength
gain advantage and over the long term
that would definitely augment muscle
hypertrophy as well. And once you're
loaded with creatine, so being loaded
with creatine means that you saturate
your muscle creatine stores. And that
requires either a loading phase of 20 to
25 grams per day for 5 to 7 days or um a
maintenance phase that you engage like 3
to five grams a day. You'll be loaded at
um about 30 days. And so during that
loading phase, it's pretty common for
people to gain roughly 2% of their body
weight um as lean mass.
>> People seem to talk about creatine like
it's this miracle thing that everybody
should be taking. That's one of the one
of the few supplements that it seems all
the uh experts I speak to about this
stuff seem to agree upon. Obviously,
vitamin D, omega-3 comes up all the time
and ultivitamins,
but creatine seems to, you know, nobody
seems to have much of an issue with it
or be able to point to many side effects
of taking with it, both for men and
women.
>> Yeah, it's got the muscul
muscularkeeletal
um benefit there. Believe it or not,
there's even um benefits for creatine on
on joint health. So um not only that,
not only the the athletic performance
and muscle hypertrophy side, but there
are things like uh improved glucose
control, improved memory. So different
domains of cognition can be enhanced by
creatine.
The level of creatine in the brain can
increase with with supplementation. And
then you create a pro-energy environment
in the brain. And that's how uh these
positive effects on memory happen with
creatine supplementation, especially in
people with uh cognitive decline. So So
it there's almost nothing creatine can't
do.
>> Wow.
Some statement.
>> A business is only as good as the people
inside it. So how do you make sure
you're hiring the best? Our sponsor,
LinkedIn, can help you find these
applicants quickly. I believe in taking
time to hire slowly, but I also
understand that once you've decided to
hire, you want to get the ball rolling
and get the best candidates in front of
you to start interviewing. And that's
where paying to promote your role on
LinkedIn makes all the difference
because you'll get applicants seven
times faster than if you post your job
for free. And even though slower, more
considered hiring is important, you
never want your hiring platforms to be
what's holding you back. LinkedIn keeps
pace. It takes care of the heavy
lifting, sending you highly skilled
candidates that you wouldn't find
anywhere else. So, when the time comes
to make your next hire, make it count
and promote your job on LinkedIn. Head
to linkedin.com/doac.
That's linkedin.com/doac
and terms and conditions apply.
>> Right guys, going to go get Steve. The
guest is here. Ready?
>> Come in.
>> Oh my god. What
>> What are you doing?
>> This is uh the Bontage face mask. It's h
good for blemishes, wrinkles, uh clears
up the skin. It's red light. Have you
not used it before?
>> No.
>> Tried this before. It's um it's really
really good. It's shines red light on
your face, which helps increase and
boost collagen production. Actually
found it out cuz the misses seen her
wearing it. She terrified me a couple of
nights in a row. Um I thought it was to
scare people with, but actually it's
really really good for your skin. So
they are a sponsor of the podcast and uh
I've been using it every day for about a
year and a half now.
>> You're glowing. Wow, Steve. Great.
>> Yes. And Boncharge ships worldwide with
easy returns and a year-long warranty on
all of their products. So, visit
bondcharge.com/diary
for 25% off on any product sitewide, but
you have to order through that link.
That's bondcharge.com/diary
with code diary.
>> Diet breaks. What's a diet break and why
does that why is that a useful tool?
>> Yes. So,
one of the big things that dieters
encounter are progress plateaus. And so,
we can define a progress plateau as four
to possibly 8 weeks of no change in body
composition despite good compliance to
the program. With that definition out of
the way, then intervening and overcoming
or managing a plateau is really sort of
this individualized process that
needs to be looked at case by case where
for example,
if somebody feels like they're in the
midst of a plateau and they have been on
program, then there's really only two
reasons the plateau happened. So reason
number one is that their compliance was
inconsistent. So poor compliance is
number one or number two they have
reached
energy equilibrium. So they've reached a
genuine and bonafide new maintenance
point. But there's something that is
overarching with the plateau concept
that people need to understand.
So we automatically look at progress
plateaus as something negative. when
people need to reorganize or reframe
their perception of what a plateau is
and the plateau is just the body doing
its job. When we look at the body as an
adaptive survival unit then homeostasis
is a big part of that. So if the body
achieves homeostasis then hallelujah
we're we're going to live. We're going
to survive. So if for example somebody
has a lot of weight to lose let's say
somewhere to the order of over 20 pounds
20 40 60 lbs to lose they have to
understand that multiple plateaus will
be encountered on route to their
ultimate goal.
And the way that the body changes is
always going to be this surge, slow,
stop pattern. And it just continues this
way. And with every progressive plateau,
the surge part gets shorter and the
slowing part and then the plateau part
gets longer. So you can think of it as
staircases and landings. So with each
successive plateau, the staircase gets
shorter, the landing gets longer, but
it's supposed to go like that and the
plateaus should be getting longer
because the ultimate goal after all is a
plateau of sorts. And when people come
to realize that, then they can look at
plateaus as what I call maintenance
practice. So if they have that mental
shift from seeing plateaus as this
negative thing where I need to go sniff
out the next great diet or the next
great product, they can look at it as
all right, so the plateau is a good
thing. The body is doing its job. Now we
have an opportunity to practice
maintenance. And think about it this way
too, Stephen. Anybody can get weight
off,
but weight loss maintenance really is
the issue. So the better you get at
weight loss maintenance, then the more
you can win the game.
>> How do I get good at weight loss
maintenance?
>> All right. So in order to properly
maintain,
you have to properly get there. So
properly getting there means that you
have to
do your best to maintain your lean body
mass while you're losing body fat. So
what happens to a lot of people when
they diet is they lose a lot of lean
body mass along with
>> lean body mass. You mean muscle?
>> Yes. Muscle mass.
>> Muscle mass
>> along with their fat mass. And so muscle
tissue is something very important to
keep on the body while you're losing fat
because muscle is we can look at it as
our metabolically
active. Every tissue is metabolically
active even even body fat. But muscle
tissue specifically is the center of our
dietary fuel usage. It is the metabolic
engine of the body, if you will. And so
if you're losing muscle tissue, you're
really losing metabolic leverage while
you're losing body fat.
>> So the way that I infer that is that
muscle is very greedy
>> and it it it takes a lot takes up a lot
of calories. So if I lose my muscle when
I get when I drop my weight, it's almost
like the greedy guy who who sucks up all
my calories is no longer there. And so
I'm quite likely just to to rebound
quite quickly.
>> That's a great analogy. And and it's
accurate, too. And in fact, there is a
phenomenon that in the literature it's
called collateral fattening.
And that happens when the body senses an
energy crisis at the end of a diet where
you've lost a bunch of muscle mass. The
body senses that, oh my gosh, we just
lost a bunch of precious tissue. We have
to do whatever we can to get it back.
And so your hunger signals ramp up and
your body kind of behaviorally and even
metabolically does what is necessary for
you to feed that back as soon as
possible. And this does not necessarily
happen certainly not to that kind of
magnitude if you keep your muscle mass
while you're losing body fat. you don't
experience this collateral fattening
type of phenomenon where people just
rebound like crazy because their
appetite is out of control at the end of
the diet. So the way that you preserve
muscle mass during the fat loss process
is a couple things. So you have to make
sure that your rate of weight loss isn't
indicative of something that's too
quick. So about a half a percent to a
full percent of your body weight lost
per week is as fast as you really want
to go. So roughly a pound a week. uh
some people who start off heavier, okay,
two pounds a week is fine at the very
beginning, but you generally don't want
to lose more than 1% of your total body
weight per week because then that
increases the chances that you're losing
an undue amount of muscle mass along
with your fat mass. And so if you can
in essence control the weight loss rate,
then you will keep your lean mass.
The other two things that need to be
going on at the same time are you need
to be resistance training and you need
to be consuming enough protein. So
>> strength training and protein
>> enough protein, you got resistance
training and then you have sort of a top
speed limiter on how much weight that
you lose per week. And 1% loss awake 1%
loss a week is spectacular actually for
most people. Even a pound a week, even
half a pound a week, you're looking at
like in two years you lost 50 pounds.
Most people took like two decades to put
on that 50 pounds.
>> So you actually don't want to lose
weight too quickly or else you are
susceptible to rebound.
>> It is going to come off quickly if you
have a lot of weight to lose. It'll come
off quickly at the beginning. So, for
example, uh somebody who is in a state
of obesity, let's say they weigh 250
pounds and let's say they're losing two
two and a half pounds a week at the
beginning of the program, that's fine.
But
on average, on average, you you would
want to look at roughly a pound a week
is a good benchmark. And I still would
not frown upon or scoff at a half a
pound a week for certain cases. And we
can talk about some of those stubborn
cases. Like on the topic of plateaus,
for example, I had a client uh I'm sure
she doesn't mind being named. She's a
great person, Pam Pam Gresock. She's a
veteran coach in the space. Uh she's
permenopausal, so she's in her her 40s.
And she wanted to lose what we
calculated out to be 8 pounds
of fat. and she stored the majority of
it where she didn't want it was around
the midsection.
And I had it in mind that okay, this is
somebody who's permenopausal, so there's
going to be a lower rate of progress
going on. This is somebody who is highly
trained. So, she doesn't have a lot more
muscle to put on that would give her
some, you know, some extra in quotes
metabolic leverage for the whole process
of improving body composition. So, she's
highly trained, permenopausal,
wants to lose 8 pounds of fat, which
would represent the final eight pounds.
sort of that that pushing the envelope.
Knowing those three things, I knew that
this is going to be a difficult and
slowgoing process. So whereas I would
normally have somebody
expect
roughly or at least gun for a pound a
week loss,
for Pam, it was more like, are you going
to be okay with
one to two pounds per month? like if we
can get rid of one to two pounds of body
fat per month, I would be happy with it
and I think you should be happy with it.
And so I convinced her of that. And with
her wanting to lose 8 pounds, I think it
helps to give people a visual of what a
certain amount of weight loss looks
like. So coincidentally, a gallon a
gallon jug if you fill it with butter,
that's 8 pounds. And so I had her
visualize this 8 pound jug.
And um I also had her do a butter
visualization too. So um a standard
stick of butter is 4 ounces. So four
sticks of butter is one pound. And uh in
her case, she wanted to lose well she
wanted to lose 8 pounds. So that's 32
sticks of butter that would be removed
from her body at the end of the dieting
cycle. Is that what this is here? What
is this?
>> That is 10 pounds of butter. This is an
amazing freaking visual. And this this
is because you asked about diet breaks
as a tool for people achieving long-term
weight loss or just breaking through
plateaus or managing plateaus. So
every 5 to 10 pounds that somebody loses
in a dieting cycle
is high time for a diet break. The way
you can define a diet break, put some
parameters on it. So it's what I call
non yolo maintenance. So you take off
the rules, take off the restrictions,
but you're not eating with sheer
abandon. You're just relaxing the diet.
You take a week off the diet either
every four to eight weeks while you're
dieting or you take a week off of the
diet
every 5 to 10 lbs that you lose. And the
sound of 5 to 10 lbs seems like oh
that's nothing.
>> But no, it's a milestone.
>> This is 10 pounds.
>> Yes,
>> that's crazy.
>> 10 pounds of of butter off the body. So
yeah, every time you you lose 10 pounds,
it's 5 to 10 pounds in in my experience
is high time to take a diet break to
just alleviate the mental and the
physical fatigue of dieting.
And that's one of the tactics that you
can use for a long-term adherence to a
plan.
On the topic of plateaus,
you can when you're dieting, you will
hit a point where the plateau periods or
the maintenance phases
are going to be longer than the dieting
phases. I think that that's ideal to be
able to hit that point for a long-term
weight loss goal. And so it's a lot
easier or at least a lot less
intimidating for somebody to know that
they're going to be dieting for 4 to 8
weeks at a time in between a let's say a
2 to 3 month maintenance phase.
>> What about fasting?
Do you think that fasting is because a
lot of people talk about this thing
called autophagy where if you fast for I
don't know 48 hours your body switches
into the state of autophagy where it
starts to heal and repair itself.
Are you a fan of fasting
for weight loss or for autophagy or
other things
>> for the control of calories in fasting
is legit and it's also legit for it. It
actually works a as a as one of the
options for dieting. There just has been
a massive
accumulation of studies showing that it
works great. So the intermittent fasting
variants, we have one one we talked
about earlier timerestricted eating and
we've got every other day fasting and
then the other third major variant would
be twice weekly fasting or the 52 type
of model. And then you have like
consecutive day fasting type of models
as well which are less studied because
there's just more risk involved in them
and it's tough to you know incur that
risk in research. When you bring up
autophagy,
that's where I kind of have to push back
on um not on your your mentioning of it
specifically, but just in general.
People will say or we'll make claims
that yeah, autophagy
and we can say that we can explain
autophagy as a way that the body gets
rid of uh parts of damaged cells.
It's an important process within the
body and it is a catabolic process or a
breakdown process.
But the thing is
it happens in a caloric deficit
regardless of whether fasting is
involved or not.
>> Really?
>> Yes. You maintain hypocchloric
conditions. Autophagy ramps up.
um you can have a linear hypocoric model
or a nonlinear or intermittent
hypocaloric model and you'll get similar
degrees of autophagy if you match the
caloric deficit by the end of the week.
Now the other interesting thing about
autophagy
is that you can ramp up autophagy
through exercise
and not only that but both major types
of exercise will increase autophagy. So
resistance training increases autophagy.
Endurance aerobic type training
increases autophagy.
So, if you want to in quotes chase
autophagy,
then doing it through intermittent
fasting or just going through prolonged
periods of not eating can be a
double-edged sword. Whereas the
autophagy increases through exercise,
they almost don't have a downside. And
so, um, a lot of times with intermittent
fasting, it can be a great tool for
people who need to lose excess body
weight. But what I'm seeing in the
community is people thinking that
intermittent fasting is something that
is necessary to do regardless of your
body fat level. That is either necessary
or beneficial. And that's not actually
true per per the research. There's
there's a this one study in particular
that looked at men who are already lean
and I believe this was by Templeton and
colleagues where they compared a linear
dieting model with an every other day
fasting model.
>> What does that mean every other day
fasting? So they took 24 hours off.
>> Yes. Yeah. So it was Yep. every other
day and then the same deficit by the end
of the by the end of the week between
the two groups. And the intermittent
group actually lost more lean body mass
than the linear caloric deficit group.
>> They lost more lean body.
>> They lost more lean body mass.
>> So they lost more weight.
>> They muscle.
>> Lost more muscle.
Yeah. And so that gives us a hint that
fasting is great until it isn't because
you've achieved what you needed to
achieve. And so then it just kind of
becomes a tool. It it it's always just a
tool to help people control calories.
And one of the beautiful things about
fasting and whether it's timerestricted
eating or whether it's some sort of
variant of alternate day fasting or
twice a week fasting
is that it works in research regardless
of whether people are meticulously
tracking things or not. And so that that
can be a boon for individuals who don't
necessarily like to micromanage their
stuff. But for people who are trying to
maximize retention of lean mass while
they're pushing the envelope of uh
fitness,
uh it can definitely be a double-edged
sword once you're already lean.
>> But if I do want to maximize the
benefits of autophagy, the best way to
do that is fasting versus just calorie
restriction. I'm assuming
>> we don't know what the optimal level of
autophagy is that would actually confer
health benefits. We don't know what that
threshold is. And there's different ways
that people try to measure autophagy.
It's very hard to correlate certain
levels of autophagy with certain
certain degrees of disease prevention.
We we're not there yet. Um, I don't
think I I I think big picture-wise I
think that autophagy
is an algorithm
running in the background that is more
of a bystander type of thing than a
driver. Simple sim similar to insulin
and glucagon. So the insulin and
glucagon axis works when you feed versus
when you're fasting. So glucagon levels
go up. What's glucagon?
>> Glucagon is a hormone that mobilizes
fuel stores in the absence of food, in
the absence of calories.
And autophagy is similar in that regard.
And I think that a focus on pushing
autophagy
is sort of missing the forest for the
trees. Because if we were to push
autophagy to its end, then we could go
all the way to a phenomenon called
autotosis, which is runaway cell death,
which happens in starvation in some
cases.
And so I think that we need to focus on
other things like how do we maintain a
certain body fat percentage while
maintaining
a certain physical activity level while
maintaining a certain dietary pattern.
I think that it's those things that are
much more productive to target than
seeing how far can we push autophagy
before potentially going into runaway
cell death.
>> Mhm. I was looking at the the benefits
of this thing they call autophagy and it
says there the proven likely benefits
are cellular cleaner. So repairs damaged
proteins and organels I believe
improving cell efficiency. Metabolic
health improves insulin sensitivity
neuroproction heart and muscle quality
maintains mitochondria helps adapt to
training and oxidative stress. immune
tuning and longevity. There's sort of
strong animal evidence I believe
>> around the longevity component, but they
the the research that I was reading
talked about how it can back back
backfire because um tumors may use
autophagy to survive. Um and some
treatments for established cancers aim
to inhibit it. And if you overdo
fasting, as you said in the study you
cited, you can lose muscle, which is not
great, and be fatigued, etc. Um there is
a bit of a trend I think with people
doing a lot of water fasts and stuff
like that quite periodically. I think
it's rising even sort of juice fasts and
stuff like that. What's your take on
those types of fasts?
>> I'm not a big fan Stephen. Uh I think
that the cycle that people go through at
least in the developed world is that
they go through the year then November
comes around and then the holidays hit.
They overdo it from November to through
December all the way up to the end of
the year and they're like, "Oh boy, I
have 10 to 20 pounds that I want to
lose." And then they just use these sort
of fasts and these detoxes to crash off
the bad decisions of the previous few
months. And then the cycle repeats
annually.
So, I think that it's a much healthier
approach for people to secure and
reinforce the right habits through the
entirety of the year instead of um
jumping on the fast to get rid of the
the the holiday binges.
>> This sort of brings me to the ketogenic
diet. Um, my dad used the ketogenic diet
and I think actually my brother as well.
Um, but also a few of my friends in my
life used it as a way to drop their fat
quite quickly to sort of recomposite
their body um, very very quickly. And
the results of seeing someone on the
ketogenic diet are quite astounding
because my friend the other day sent me
the chart of his weighing scales at home
and it's the sort of gradual increase
upwards and then he did the ketogenic
diet where he cut out carbohydrates and
sugars basically almost entirely and
it's just straight line down in his body
his body weight. What is your
perspective on the ketogenic diet? What
is it good for? What is it not good for?
Is it good at all?
It is a very effective way to lose
weight and fat.
And that's for a few big reasons. First
of all, if somebody goes from their
typical western dietary pattern to the
ketogenic diet, then they're
automatically cutting out a lot of
highly processed, hyper palatable
carb fat combo junk foods and snacks.
that are just energy dense, easy to over
consume mindlessly.
That's the good thing about the
ketogenic diet in addition to well,
they're finally eating enough protein
now. And so along with the increase in
protein comes an increase in satiety and
a better hunger control.
Now, the negatives of the ketogenic
diet, the big one is that the majority
of people who engage a ketogenic diet,
they don't do it permanently. For one
reason or another, they're no longer on
the keto diet. And this is reflected in
research as well. Even in uh vulnerable
populations who would stand to benefit
from from that level of restriction. So
usually what happens in research is you
take you take a group two groups of
subjects and one is on the high carb
low-fat control diet and one of them is
on a ketogenic diet which can be
achieved by a maximum of 50 grams of
carbohydrate in the day or or less then
you're on the keto diet. So what happens
at the 12 month point in the diet and
sometimes at the six-month point, the
keto group is now consuming about two to
three times more carbohydrates than the
original 50 gram assignment.
>> So they rebound.
>> They just insidiously creep up the carb
intake.
There's something about the ketogenic
diet that the majority of people who
engage it just can't stick to. It's too
restrictive for people. they can't stick
to it. But by what you're saying, they
also end up rebounding
>> above where they were before.
>> They end up rebounding like I'll give
you a specific example.
There was one study
well there was the A Toz study where um
the individuals on the Atkins diet ended
up consuming what looked a lot like the
zone diet.
>> The zone diet?
>> Yes. The zone diet is a 40%
carbohydrate, 30% protein, 30% fat.
>> So it's the keto diet roughly.
>> Um the keto diet is more like 60 to 80%
fat and then you know 15 to 20ish%
protein and then the carbohydrates are
the remainder
the minor percentage. So what happens is
like the people who started off at 50
gram of carbohydrate at the beginning of
the study, the keto group at the
12-month point, they were they crept
that carbohydrate intake up to around
150 gram of carbohydrate, whereas their
assignment was 50 gram of carbohydrate a
day. This is a common theme in long-term
keto studies is this up creep in
carbohydrate intake over time because
people can't maintain the the the 50
grams of carbohydrate max required to
stay in ketosis.
And I'm not saying that there aren't a
lot of people out there who are just
living the keto life permanently.
They're out there.
>> Yeah.
>> But they are in the minority. I see them
in the comment section whenever I talk
about keto. I see people say, "Look,
I've been on the keto diet for 5 years,
for seven years, for 10 years."
>> Sure, there's entire there's huge
communities of folks who've been on keto
for 5 10 years or longer. And that's
great. More power to these folks. But
claiming that this is a universal
solution ignores the reality that some
people, most people uh per the research,
the majority can't stick to it. So
that's the the caveat, one of the
caveats of the keto diet. The other one
would be for those who can stick to the
keto diet for long enough. You really
have to look at the quality of uh the
diet in order for it to be
cardiovascularly healthy. If you're
going to engage an let's say an 80 85%
fat diet for the rest of your life,
there's going to be very different
effects if that 80 to 85% are from land
animal fats versus from nuts, avocados,
olive oil.
Very different cardiovascular effects
going on there. And so, uh, that's the
other caveat with the keto diet. There's
a Mediterranean type of keto diet that
is healthy and that has, you know, it it
is one of these cardiovascularly
protective types of diets that you can
engage. Whereas, if you just do like
beef, bacon, and butter from here on
out, then uh you don't have the best
cardiovascular risk trajectory.
>> What about gaining muscle on the
ketogenic diet? If I'm restricting
carbohydrates, is it more difficult to
gain muscle mass?
>> The short answer is yes. And the nuanced
answer is
you still can gain muscle on keto.
And the body is is really resilient and
and quite genius at manufacturing the
carbohydrate um endogenously or from
within the body. So your your body can
make carbohydrate out of lactate and
fill at least partially your muscle
glycogen stores. And so um going on a
zero carbohydrate diet doesn't
necessarily
end up with the type of results that you
you you might imagine for somebody who's
completely avoiding carbohydrates. And
in the research comparing
strength gains from a high carbohydrate,
low-fat diet versus a keto diet, the
keto folks, as long as they're equated
with protein and total calories with the
control diet, they've got similar
strength gains. It's quite a an
interesting phenomenon.
Muscle size gains is different story.
Interestingly,
almost always there's some advantage to
the high carb, low-fat control group
compared with the ketogenic diet group
when it comes to both gains in lean mass
as well as retention of lean mass during
dieting. And one of those things is
more or less obvious. It's like you you
simply carry more muscle glycogen when
you're on a high carbohydrate, low-fat
diet. and muscle glyco glycogen is the
stored form of carbohydrate within the
muscle and then a minor amount in the
liver and for every gram of carbohydrate
that you store as glycogen there's
threeish grams of water stuck to it and
so just sitting there you're carrying
more more muscle mass more fullness on a
non ketogenic diet
>> what about the carnivore diet a lot of
people have talked about that recently
which is just a diet where you just eat
meat What's your just your point of view
on that?
>> Well, okay, it's a little silly and it's
a little extreme, but it has some merit
to it. So, the carnivore diet, when you
get on it, it's similar to how when
people go on a keto diet after they've
been doing the standard western diet
since forever. So, the standard western
diet has too much of everything. It's
got too much total calories, too much
refined carbohydrate. It's got too much
of this type of fat and too much h it's
got a moderate amount of protein, but
you're also eating everything under the
sun from burgers to fries to cakes to
ice creams to cookies. Uh in addition to
pasta and everything else. So when you
go from that excess of everything to the
carnivore diet, you automatically and
spontaneously eat far fewer calories
than you used to on your standard
western diet. So the carnivore diet is
actually the lesser of the evils when
we're comparing it to the standard
western diet. And you can even try to
optimize the carnivore diet. Like some
people engage a carnivore diet that is
just extreme like beef and salt. Okay?
So that is very appealing to people who
have a tendency to jump on the carnivore
diet cuz it's even more extreme. And
people with tendencies towards the
extremes, they'll a lot of them are exve
one one extreme side or the other. It's
tough for them to be in the gray scale
here. But the carnivore diet
is um the lesser of the evils.
can be optimized, if that's even
possible, if people had more variety
within their carnivore model, within
their plant-free diet model. Like for
example, if some went carnivore, instead
of doing beef and salt, he had a
rotation of fatty fish, poultry, beef,
eggs, dairy,
and who knows, maybe he might even
justify protein powder in there for a
dessert. Who knows? It's still
animal-based.
Um,
>> do you find that vegans and vegetarians
struggle more to gain muscle mass?
Typically,
>> vegans and vegetarians
in the general population do because
they're not aware of how to structure
the diet and the training program to to
achieve that. So,
>> what are they missing?
>> They're just not eating enough total
calories and they're not eating enough
protein, generally speaking. Now, there
are some vegans who will drink a bunch
of Mountain Dew and, you know, have have
um potato chips and and things like that
and still stay vegan. And Oreo cookies
are vegan, I I believe, as well. But
vegans can still gain muscle on par with
omnivores if they structure it right.
>> Are most people that you encounter and
have worked with over the years not
getting enough protein?
like the average person on the street.
>> Yes.
Almost everybody who has been overweight
or obese
or just had some degree of of an issue
with their body fat levels. Almost all
of them
under consume protein.
>> What about people that are very skinny?
because I've got lots of friends that um
would be in the skinny fat category
where they they're kind of they look
very very very skinny but they've got
you know a little bit of a role here
>> um and they often say to me that they
just can't gain weight.
>> I've heard this a lot from from friends.
I I just can't get gain weight. I've
heard I need to have more protein but
you know I'm just not gaining any
weight.
>> Yeah, that is the in quotes hard gainer
phenomenon. And people will have
different degrees of body fat in in that
category. But these folks, what they
actually have an issue with is a
spontaneous increase in what we call non
exercise activity thermogenesis. So
basically, it's an increase in
spontaneous movement. just an increase
in fidgeting, you know, tapping, moving
around, uh just being more hyperinetic
in response to increasing their caloric
intake. In 24 hours, you and I expend X
amount of calories.
>> Mhm.
>> So total daily energy expenditure is
composed of um various components. So
there is a resting energy expenditure
component. M
>> so our so-called resting metabolic rate
or it's also called resting energy
expenditure or basil metabolic rate
those are all interchangeable
that is the amount of calories that your
body burns in a 24-hour period just to
stay alive. Okay so if you are bedridden
the amount of calories you you burn just
through your vital organs and your
systems working that's your resting
energy expenditure.
Now the other part of energy expenditure
is your active energy expenditure. So
active energy expenditure consists of we
can subdivide it into your exercise
activity and your non-ex exercise
activity. With hard gainers it's their
nonex exercise activity that
spontaneously
goes up when they try to eat more to
gain weight. There's a an interesting
study done in the late 1990s by Lavine
and colleagues where he took a group of
normal weight subjects. It was mostly
male sample of subjects and he fed them
1,000 calories above and beyond their
maintenance requirements and I believe
this was for 10 weeks. What happened
during the during the study and as a
result of eating 1,000 calories above
their maintenance needs, they ended up
burning on average 336 calories through
an increase in nonex exercise activity.
So that that is a very interesting
phenomenon. One of the uh subjects in
that study actually ended up burning
almost 700 calories as an increase in
their non exercise activity
thermogenesis.
And so what happens to this archetype,
this hardgain gainer person is they just
start fidgeting more, they just start
walking faster. They just start sitting
less. They start bobbing their head
more. And they can even uh just
subconsciously train harder, train more,
and their energy expenditure side just
ramps up spontaneously in response to an
increase in calories. So,
>> so if someone is a hard gainer and they
struggle to gain weight because of this
sort of spontaneous energy usage,
>> what advice would you give them?
>> To stop moving,
>> eat more.
Okay, so the principle would be to eat
more. Uh the practice would be eat more
in a way that you get those calories in
easily and conveniently.
And so you can structure liquid meals,
two in a day. They rarely need three
shakes to have between their meals
at any point in the day where it's
convenient. And then you just literally
add nutrition and calories that way.
And that so that's the solution. Just
literally eat more.
>> I think the the thing that sits
underneath everything we're talking
about is motivation,
whatever that means, which is like
having the motivation to stick to
something, discipline, whatever you want
to call it. When you look back through
the last 30 years of your career, are
there any similarities in the thing or
the catalyst moment that made somebody
finally stick to it? stick to the diet,
stick to the exercise regime, stick to
the whatever.
>> Is there are there any themes of a
person going from struggling to
disciplined?
>> So the first thing that comes to my mind
is they finally arrive at the point
where their physical goals become
priority number one.
changing the body. So, losing body fat,
gaining muscle, achieving
your ideal body composition,
that is a colossally difficult goal.
Whenever I work with somebody who's
preparing for a contest of some sort,
whether it is in the more elite line of
physique contest or whether they're just
joining a transformation challenge, but
they're both very very serious and they
both are putting their program at the
top of their priority list. So when I
say top of your priority, I mean
you do what you need to do to stay alive
and and and keep breathing as as a top
priority. And right there is your
physical goals. Okay. So, the big
problem with people who find that they
can't hit their goals or they can't stay
consistent or they're just having a
struggle losing x amount of body fat or
even a struggle gaining x amount of
muscle is that they simply have five
other things that are prioritized in
their day above and beyond their their
program. Mhm.
>> So they have five
universes of excuses that can come in
the way of sticking to the program. So
somebody has to be at the point in their
lives where they're going to make it a
top priority because you know there's
nothing metabolically different from
these physique competitors and these
people who join these challenges versus
somebody in the general population who's
just struggling.
The people in the physique contests will
always hit their goal within 1% at the
end of the prep period. They'll always
hit their goal. And so they're not a
different species. They're not a
different animal. They don't have
special metabolisms. They just have
different priorities. And so that is the
difference. You have to hit a point
where your physical goal becomes
priority one. And is there anything
that one can do in your opinion or that
you try and do when you were a trainer
back in the day to make this someone's
priority?
>> You can sit somebody down and
review with them the what are the
reasons why you're doing this? name me
three three three good things that you
think will come out of this or three
drivers that you can think about and
then you can just have them write that
down and then they can be reminded that
way but fundamentally Stephen they have
to arrive at that point sort of on a
self-initiated way you you can't really
make the horse drink you know you can
pull them towards the freaking pond
you know, they almost have to to get
there themselves. And and you're kind of
you can facilitate it only to a certain
degree. And after you ask them, okay,
what what are the reasons? Then you can
also have them put in their face, okay,
what are the barriers? So to have them
write down your three biggest stumbling
blocks and so then you can give them two
sets of things to think about that will
keep them on task and motivated.
>> You're 53 years old.
>> 53. 53 years old. You looked very
different at 40 years old.
>> Ah. Oh, yes, sir. I did.
Yeah. Whoa, buddy. Yep. Yep. Mhm. I
remember that guy.
Woo. That's an amazing shot.
I
>> mean, you look younger now.
>> I do, actually. Thank God. Thank God.
Yeah. Yeah. That that always gets me,
man. That that picture always gets me.
Why?
>> It was when my my first son was sevenish
and my younger baby was um about four.
And so parents with young children are
very stressed out, bad habits. I used to
drink heavily. Yeah. I I started
drinking heavily at that point. Um, and
I drank heavily from when I was 40 till
I was about 46.
>> Were you an alcoholic at at 40 years
old?
>> Oh, yes. Oh, yes.
>> What did that look like?
>> It was it it got really bad towards the
final couple years. I'm talking a bottle
bottle and a half of wine a a night by
myself.
>> Seven days a week.
>> Seven days a week. And the bottle and a
half that's almost 1,000 calories of
1,000 calories of regret is what it was.
Yeah.
>> Do you know what caused that?
>> The various stress vectors in life, you
know. um
being a dad,
trying to be the best husband.
Um becoming successful uh in terms of
coming into demand with projects and
people approaching me with business
partnerships
and um me thinking, geez, I I worked
like two decades for this for this stuff
to happen. How can I turn anything down?
you know, so I said, "Yes, I'll do that.
Yes, I'll do that. Yes, yes, yes, yes,
yes." And then pretty soon your your
yeses just stack up and your work pile
stacks up like this. All of those
things, you know, they kind of converge
into this mix of stress and anxiety. And
alcohol
is a very convenient and very
available and very acceptable means
to
engage in a substance that acts as an
anxiety band-aid. My alcohol addiction
was a very real thing. Uh, and
I'm really glad I I overcame it.
>> Through this period from 40 to 46, 47,
>> who were you and what is it that you
you did that made you realize something
had to change?
>> So during that time period,
I was just very reactive. to my
environment.
>> I was just going with the flow.
Uh I honestly was not
as ambitious as I should have been and
and focused on my goals.
I was comfortable.
And
the unfortunate thing about the drink
and fortunate thing too is it it hit a
rock bottom point where
I knew that it wasn't a matter of all
right I got to pull back or how am I
going to moderate and this and that. It
was more like
I just need to stop. I just need to stop
and I need to redirect this tendency
towards routine. this tendency, this
sort of obsessive compulsive thing of
needing to do the same thing daily, just
redirect it.
>> How did you know you needed to stop?
>> Oh, I knew that I needed to stop because
my professional and personal life
basically imploded all all because of my
my own actions.
>> Now, for you, was it just a case of
right, I'm going to stop doing this or
did you have to did you go somewhere?
Did you get support? Did you seek some
counseling or anything like that? So, I
have been able to just make the hardcore
commitment to stop and keep that
commitment. And um I've been able to
redirect my ritualistic tendencies
towards training and good nutrition. And
I get a lot of questions like every year
I do a post on Instagram about how,
okay, it's year six now, not a single
drink. Here's what I've learned during
that time. And then uh next month
uh actually on the 25th of August uh
that's going to be year seven. So I'm
going to do the same thing. And so the
question I always get is so how do you
stay abstinate? Like what what do you do
to not slip up?
And
what I do is if I get kind of a craving
or a nagging or a feeling like, "Oh my
god, I got to have some alcohol."
Then I just sit back and I think through
the scenario in my mind of me drinking
to my degree of satisfaction, degree of,
you know, s-facedness
and then I kind of picture that and then
I picture how it might last for an hour
or two and then after that hour or two I
may have made some really bad
impressions on on one or more people.
Uh, after that hour or two, I may have
plowed through the the hot wings at 2
3:00 a.m.
And then after that, feel like hell the
next morning. Definitely can't work out
that day.
And then where did that get me? And so I
just go through that scenario in my
mind. And then when I'm done going
through that scenario, it takes like a
minute and I'm right back at uh where I
need to be uh mind frame wise.
>> I think the same could also apply that
sort of visualization that premortem
where you kind of play out the scenario
and see what the consequence would be
can also be applied to many of the
things we're talking about today around
diet and workouts and stuff like that.
Like playing it forward to see how
you'll feel about it in the future and
sort of visualizing those consequences.
Thank you for sharing that. I I think
it's somewhat dovetailed into how what
what we're talking about about changing
your life and motivation and discipline
like how does change occur in people and
as you said it's when it becomes a
priority and quite clearly in your life
it became a priority for a number of
reasons.
>> Yeah.
>> Quick one I want to talk about something
we all need to take seriously which is
cyber security. Whether you're a
first-time founder facing your very
first audit or a seasoned professional
who's been through it all, staying
compliant is getting more critical than
ever and more complicated, I have to
say. And that is where Vanta comes in,
who is a sponsor of this podcast. Vant
takes the pain out of security
compliance, automating the tedious but
essential process of proving your
business is secure across over 35
frameworks like SOCK 2, ISO 2701.
centralize your workflows, answer
security questions up to five times
faster, and protect your business
without losing focus on growth. And this
is really a critical part of this. A new
IDC white paper found that companies
using Vant save over $535,000
a year, and it pays for itself in just 3
months. For a limited time, my community
gets $1,000 off Vanta at
vanta.com/stephven.
That's van.com/stephven
for $1,000 off. Electrolytes are
absolutely exploding at the moment and
it's for good reason. People are getting
more and more into their health and
fitness and one of the things that I
think we've recently discovered as a
society is the profound impact that
electrolytes have on hydration but also
the impact that hydration has on how you
feel, how you perform, how you think. So
with all that in mind and because I
became quite obsessed with electrolytes,
I decided that I was going to launch my
own electrolytes company as you do. And
as I was doing that, I spoke to my
friend George Heaton and I said,
"George, I'm launching this electrolytes
business. Can you take a look at it?" He
said, "Stephen, me and my friend Ross
have already developed one and would
love to show it to you." And then they
put me in this WhatsApp group and said,
"We're building a brand called Cadence.
We haven't launched yet, but take a
look." I took a look. I tried the cans,
I tried the sachets, and I fell in love.
So, I shut down my own electrolytes
company and took a stake in this one
called Cadence, which has been by far in
a way the best product in terms of
taste, but also in terms of performance.
500 mg of sodium, 190 millig of
potassium, 30 mg of magnesium, no sugar,
delicious taste. Give it a shot. Go to
usecadence.com and join what I believe
to be is the fastest growing
electrolytes company on planet earth.
Cheers.
How do you feel about artificial
sweeteners? Are they uh is there any
watchouts that we should be aware of?
Generally speaking, they're a nothing
burger and there's a lot of
scaremongering around artificial
sweeteners.
But there is one artificial sweetener
that has a kind of a crappy track record
for both impairing glucose control and
also weight gain. And that's saccharine.
So saccharine is the one artificial
sweetener that's kind of bombed out at
the bomb shelter there as far as the
literature is concerned. But the good
news about saccharine,
it's by the way, it's the little pink
packet things.
It's not really uh commercially
pervasive.
>> So it's not that popular anyway.
>> No, it's almost commercially extinct.
So, um, the other sweeteners like
sucralose, aspartame, stevia, or some
people call it stevia, um, they're all
fair game. They're all in the same boat.
All pretty dang innocuous. And you'd
have to consume
impossible amounts of those things to
incur negative health effects in in a
lifetime, really.
>> Because some people have thought that
they're potentially carcen,
these sort of artificial sweeteners that
you find in certain diet beverages.
>> Yeah. No, that's that's definitely a
leap. That's definitely a leap based on
animal data and completely unrealistic
doses and conditions that are irrelevant
to human physiology.
Yeah, it's it's more dangerous stepping
out and breathing in the the city air
basically.
>> What is the most important thing we
haven't talked about that we should have
talked about, Alan,
for the people that are sat at home
listening to this?
>> A really damn good question.
Okay. So,
if we look at the things people care
about that don't freaking matter in
terms of diet,
they fixate on weird buzzwords like they
fixate on not even they don't have to be
weird words but like sugar for example.
There has been such scaremongering
around sugar to the point that people
don't delineate between added sugars to
the diet versus sugar that is intrinsic
or naturally occurring in foods. Things
like fruit, fresh fruit
>> and even milk has naturally occurring uh
sugar in it. Lactose
um can be problematic for um some of the
population. But look at fresh fruit.
I've actually heard people
vilify fruit because it has sugar
and
it's one thing to take an idea and put
out a a plausible claim. Okay, so yeah,
it's got sugar and then you know we all
know that if you add a ton of sugar to
the diet, you lower the quality of the
diet and then you can um push your bets
towards negative health consequences
down the line. Okay, that that's fine.
That's reasonable. But
even though fruit has sugar, it also has
a ton of other beneficial components to
it. And it's in this low calorie, high
water, high micronutrient density
package that is satiating and displaces
stomach space for other wise junky foods
that you may a lot of people would have
consumed instead of that fruit.
But beyond all that, for forget about
all the reasoning and stuff, let's look
at the literature. Does fruit cause
negative health consequences? Does it
cause things like impaired blood glucose
control? Does it cause obesity? Does it
cause weight gain? Uh, it does the
opposite of all those things. Fresh
fruit actually has been shown to improve
glycemic control, improve body weight,
improve body composition, and improve
the protection against a range of
cardioabolic diseases and cancer. So
it doesn't really matter what anybody
says. We just have to face face the
evidence. Um there's something called
the glycemic index that was big in the
80s and 90s and people were it's kind of
come back around again. glycemic index.
You got to avoid the high glycemic index
foods and things like that. And there's
a couple of fruits that are actually
have a high glycemic index. That would
be pineapples and and watermelons,
>> watermelons.
>> Yeah. High on the GI scale. But the way
that glycemic index is determined is you
get 50 grams of carbohydrate from a
given food regardless of the amount that
you have to eat. 50 grams of it. And
then you measure its effect on your
blood sugar levels for 2 hours after
ingestion. I was going to say cuz
watermelon's seen as keto friendly which
is but but
>> watermelons have what's called a low
glycemic load. So they have a very low
amount of carbohydrate per serving.
>> Yeah. Per serving. Yeah.
>> Even though the carbohydrate itself if
you were to gather 50 grams of it
>> would have a a more pronounced effect on
blood sugar elevations.
And so they're even though fruits those
fruits have a high GI and certain foods
have a high GI, they have a low glycemic
load. And ultimately people need to stop
um stop and think about things like the
the longest living populations on the
planet do not avoid fruit. The fruit is
a regular part of their intake.
>> What about the white stuff? The white
sort of added sugar. The is it called
refined sugar?
>> What about We can call it added sugar.
>> Mhm.
>> What about the added sugar?
>> Added sugar is problematic in two
different ways at least. So the first
way is it's diluting the nutrient
density of the diet. It's uh it's a
phenomenon called micronutrient
dilution. when you have just a bunch of
junk
micronutrient-free calories in the diet.
The other way that it poses a problem is
because it is usually packaged with
highly processed and engineered refined
carbohydrate and fat combination foods.
So, your classic desserts,
pastries, cookies, cakes, things like
that.
And so the sugar itself, if you were to
if I were to just put a a jar of sugar
in front of you and say, "Hey, I
challenge you to not just spoon that
in." You'll go, "Oh, no problem." You
know, it's people paint sugar out to be
this inherently evil thing. But the way
that it gets into trouble is when it is
a part of these hyper palatable, highly
processed, high, highly engineered
dessert and snack foods. And so that is
the main issue with added sugar. And the
various health organizations I mentioned
the Institute of Medicine or now the
National Academy of Medicine saying,
"Hey, we need to cut off our added
sugars at 25% of the diet." There's the
World Health Organization who presents
the sort of the absolutely terrified
version of that where they want people
to max out their added sugar to to 5% of
the calories in the diet. But that's
usually not realistic
and it gets a little bit extreme to the
point of being um pathological. So,
>> so what would you say
>> about 10% of total calories max wi with
added sugar and that would fall kind of
right into this discretionary caloric
aotment of 10 to 20% of calories kind of
from whatever you want and I would want
to qualify that 10 to 20% margin by
saying that if you're hyper caloric
in other words if you're consuming more
calories than you're taking in you're
trying to gain weight or something like
that you probably want to keep your your
discretionary calorie aotment to 10% or
your indulgence food to 10% rather than
20%.
>> How many days a week do you go to the
gym?
>> Four to five.
>> I'm just trying to confront this this
question mark in my head about if you go
to the gym seven days a week, for
example, is that not giving your body
enough time to rest? But I guess it
depends what you're doing there and how
hard you're working.
>> Yeah. A great example of that is total
sets per week.
>> Okay. you know, like you can cram, let's
imagine for a given muscle group, you do
like nine nine sets a week or 10 sets a
week. Uh, you could probably get those
in in a single session, but it's more
productive to probably spread it out
over at least two days.
>> How long does it take for me to start to
lose muscle?
>> Oh man. Okay, that is a good question
and a tough one. So muscle loss happens
very rapidly in bedridden individuals.
So lean mass just especially critically
ill folks, oh man, goes really fast.
Contrast that with you taking a week off
or even two weeks off, but it's more of
like um an active rest where you're not
just merely sitting around.
You could probably go a couple weeks
before you start noticing
material drops in in strength and
fitness. Uh 3 weeks, yeah, you'll
definitely I think you'll definitely
feel that.
>> And do I need to work out till failure
in terms of resistance training and
like, you know, bicep curls, whatever,
in order to get gains? Do I need to be
going all the way until I can't curl it
anymore?
It depends on the goal. Um, you
mentioned that your goal was to gain
muscle.
>> Yeah.
>> So, in reality, um, and and this
question is surprisingly more complex
than you might hope it it's going to be,
but okay. When people try to train to
failure, and this has been tested out in
the research literature, they usually
automatically leave one to two reps in
the tank, even three reps in the tank.
And even trained even resistance trained
subjects when you tell them to train a
failure or leave one rep in reserve,
they'll routinely leave actually two to
three reps in reserve. So people
underestimate their their abilities to
push uh they usually as almost an
automatic margin there that the body
sort of regulates and governs
>> and sort of automatically prevents you
from going. So with that said, I think
that most people can train to failure
without worrying about whether they're
violating the the golden uh guidelines
seen in the literature. what it's very
common for um the consensus in the
exercise science community, even in the
hypertrophy folks to say, "Yeah, leave
one to two reps in reserve."
I think that depends on on the exercise.
So, you'd be kind of a fool to be doing
lateral raises to to like to think that
you can't do partials for lateral raises
and and still get some benefit out of
it. And you'd be kind of a fool to
think, "Yeah, I'm going to do
concentration curls here. I'm gonna
leave one to two reps in reserve." No,
that's different. On the other hand,
deadlifting, benching, squatting, these
sort of a
free weight barbell multi-jint types of
movements, oh, they're they're more
conducive to leaving one to two reps in
the tank. But for single joint isolation
exercises and even machine exercises and
lighter loads
where it's safe, take it to failure.
Man,
>> we have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next not knowing who
they're leaving it for. And the question
left for you is how does nature impact
on your life?
>> It it it has quite a big impact.
Um yeah it it has an impact and and
obviously the environment is important.
>> I'm wondering through the lens of what
you do in terms of you know you know
mindset and health and psych you know
these kinds of things if you think much
about being outside
versus being inside. You know, I've even
read some interesting studies around
people that run outside versus on a
treadmill have more sort of uh have
cognitive benefits
because the brain is stimulated more.
>> I think that there there's a good amount
of literature on the
psychological benefits of of just being
in nature or even getting getting some
sun. And I think that there's
epidemiological like population based
data showing that the marine communities
tend to be the longevity champs.
>> Marine, what does that mean?
>> Uh communities that that live by the
ocean are close to the ocean.
And
>> probably that all that omega-3 they're
eating from the fish
>> and that factors in as well for sure.
But that just the kind almost the
metaphysical effect of going to the
beach, you know, that's got to play in
it. And so so yeah, I I I think it
definitely has an effect and I think
that there are data that we can point to
that says it does.
>> Alan, where where should people go right
now if they want to learn more from you?
Where where is the best place to follow
you for more information as as you
continue to investigate and educate on
the science of all of the things we've
talked about today?
My website is alanaragon.com.
That's the hub of everything. And maybe
my most active social media platform is
Instagram. So that is at the Allen
Aragon.
>> And this book I have in front of me.
When did you write this book?
>> I wrote that thing from
Well, it includes the 30 years of
experience that I was talking about
earlier. Mhm.
>> So, I've just crammed the 30 years into
there. But the actual writing of that
took from about 20
all the way to 2022.
>> Yeah.
>> Took about two years.
>> So, first published in 2022. And it's
really like a bible. That's kind of the
way I describe it. And it has everything
in it from what I love about it is you
have all these pictures as well.
>> I'm glad you like it. Well, I mean it's
like it's it's dare I say it's it's
quite like a
like a like a nice accessible textbook.
>> Well, there's been a couple of
professors who've adopted it and made it
a part of their curriculum.
>> Interesting. Doesn't surprise me.
>> Yeah. Hunter Waldman is one of them.
>> Yeah.
>> Thank you so much, Alan. Thank you for
doing what you do. Um, people love your
message because it's so demystifying in
a world that is increasingly mystified
by lots of information from lots of
different people. So, please do continue
to do what you're doing. And I I uh I'm
rooting for you in this new season of
life where you're going to get even
closer to patients once again and
clients once again and be even more
hands-on with your community. So, I
highly recommend everybody goes and
follows you on Instagram to keep track
of how they can join your community and
be one of those people that you directly
impact with your work. And yeah, I'm
gonna I'm gonna subscribe to your review
so that I can stay ahead of all of the
um the scientific literature as and when
it comes out because for me it is quite
demystifying. But you you're one of the
great voices in this space of um
simplification and understanding. So I
applaud you for that.
>> I think it's all learnable. It's all
teachable. But thank you so much for the
opportunity to be on this show. This is
huge. And uh thank you all for tuning
in.
>> Thank you. We're done.
[Music]
Oh hey oh hey oh hey oh hey oh hey oh
hey oh hey oh hey oh hey oh hey oh